# FIVEAM-ASDF : Integrating System Definitions and FiveAM testing #

FIVEAM-ASDF defines a new system class `FIVEAM-TESTER-SYSTEM` that provides functionality
for running tests using FiveAM and raising an error if the tests fail, or if an unexpected
number of tests run. This provides a definition for the `ASDF:TEST-OP` operation of the
defined system. It's useful for incorporation into a continuous integration framework, as
well.

New in version 3.0 is the system class `PACKAGE-INFERRED-FIVEAM-TESTER-SYSTEM`, which
combines the behavior of `FIVEAM-TESTER-SYSTEM` with the package-per-file style of 
[ASDF's PACKAGE-INFERRED-SYSTEM extension](https://common-lisp.net/project/asdf/asdf/The-package_002dinferred_002dsystem-extension.html)

## How to use ##

The "fiveam-asdf" ASDF system adds a new subclass of `ASDF:SYSTEM`.  If you wish to test a
system, `foo`, it is usually best to create a subsystem like this:

    (defsystem foo
      :in-order-to ((test-op (test-op "foo/test")))
      ...)

    (defsystem "foo/test"
      :defsystem-depends-on ("fiveam-asdf")
      :depends-on ("fiveam" "foo" ...)
      :class fiveam-tester-system
      ....)

Having the tests in this ancillary subsystem avoids the need for your main system to
depend on FiveAM itself, so it (and your test definitions) will only be loaded if you
actually want to run the tests.

Now, add files with FiveAM tests in them into the components of `foo/test`, as you wish.
See the FiveAM docs for how to do this.

### Listing tests to run ###

List the names of all of your tests in the `:TEST-NAMES` property of your test system's
defsystem.  Entries in here can either be a symbol designator or a cons whose `CAR` is a
symbol designator and whose `CDR` is a package designator.

If all of your FiveAM test names are defined in a single package, you can set the
`:test-package` property of your `FIVEAM-TESTER` system, and any package *un*qualified
elements of `:test-names` will be searched for in the `:test-package`.

Note that FiveAM offers named test *suites*.  Typically it will be most convenient to make
a small number of such suites for your system, and name only these suites in `test-names`,
rather than naming each individual test.

### Integrating with ASDF's TEST-OP ###

Doing `(asdf:test-system "foo/test")` will run all the tests in the `fiveam-tester`
system.  However, as above, it is best to use ASDF's `:in-order-to` to connect `foo` to
`foo/test` for testing purposes.  Then a user can simply do `(asdf:test-system "foo")`
without needing to know how the tests are implemented.

If any tests fail, a condition of type `asdf:fiveam-asdf-failure` will be raised. It is
necessary to do this, because `asdf:test-system` does not return a value.  One can easily
write a test script that will run `asdf:test-system` and either exit with 0 if the tests
all pass, or 1 otherwise.

### Test counts ###

In our experience, it was possible to introduce bugs that would cause tests not to be run
at all, which could appear indistinguishable from all the tests passing, since all the
tests *that were run* would pass.

So we added the `:num-checks` option to `fiveam-tester` systems.  If you specify a number
of checks (note that in FiveAM the number of checks is *not*, in general, the same as the
number of *tests*), then a condition of type `fiveam-wrong-number-of-checks` will be
raised if a differernt number of checks are actually run.

### Using PACKAGE-INFERRED-SYSTEM to avoid writing out your dependency graph ###

Define a system `"foo/test"` like above. Set its `:class` as
`package-inferred-fiveam-tester-system`. Specify its `:test-names`, `:test-package` and
`:num-checks` as appropriate. Do not specify a `:components` property. Set its
`:depends-on` property to the list `("foo/test/package")`.

Create a file `test/package.lisp` whose first form is a `uiop:define-package` form which
defines the package `foo/test/package`. `:use`, `:mix`, `:mix-reexport`, `:import-from` or
otherwise depend on any packages your tests need, likely including `fiveam`, `foo` and any
other `foo/test/bar` files in your test suite. Each of those files must start with a
similar `uiop:define-package` form.
